[Music]
boy what a world we live in now we read
articles we find information we check
out facts and we try to understand
everything through a quick Google search
our minds go through trillions of
processes at any given second sometimes
it's even hard to keep up but here's the
thing how do we know if what we read is
true and not an elaborate lie well there
are some ways to figure it out number
one
be on the lookout for cognitive bias as
humans we try to understand how the
world functions around us through the
information we're exposed to by
filtering organizing and understanding
we do this up consciously to prevent our
mind from getting overwhelmed as the
years go by and we acquire more
information this process of our
understanding becomes repetitive which
means that we process information
through patterns based on our previous
experiences in an attempt to simplify
the information we're exposed to we take
mental shortcuts that lead us sometimes
on the wrong path the errors we make
when processing information is a
phenomenon called cognitive bias or in
simpler words it's your own subjective
social reality you see most of the time
we're attracted to information that fits
our personal narrative let me give you
an example imagine you're browsing on
your computer to find out if a certain
diet will work for you you probably
search something like does this diet
help you lose weight
now Google in return will give you
information that corresponds to your
question that the diet helps you lose
weight but if you're looking to gain
weight you'll search the opposite the
results you'll find are basically what
you want to hear therefore even your
searches become biased and this is
backed up by investigation as well
researchers from Ohio State University
found that students who go online to
browse for news stories and articles
pick the ones that support their current
subjective views let's take the story of
the Loch Ness monster for example in
1934 there was a photo of the mosque
circling around through the media this
story made headlines fast and everyone
believed it
it wasn't until 1994 that a man
confessed it was just a model made out
of a submarine toy if you were to Google
does the Loch Ness monster exists then
images of the Loch Ness monster would
show up number two listen to what
they're not telling you if you've worked
in customer service then you probably
know this firsthand when someone is
physically attractive and they give you
positive nonverbal cues like smiling or
making eye contact they can have more of
an impact on you than the words they're
saying so sometimes all it takes is good
eye contact or a captivating photo and
you're sold on the idea or the product
this is what experts call the halo
effect which is actually a type of
cognitive bias you see when we come
across an attractive person we
subconsciously assume that they're
intelligent and capable many people in
the media and powerful professions use
their appearance and their nonverbal
cues as a manipulative tool to gain
credibility and use it to their
advantage but when you pay close
attention to other nonverbal cues you
can decipher if someone is credible or
not Paul Ekman otherwise known as the
human lie detector is an American
psychologist who mastered the art of
detecting Liars through their body
language micro expressions and tone of
voice when someone is making a statement
that's not true they tend to make micro
expressions that can happen in the blink
of an eye that will reveal the truth
behind their words they could be a frown
or a grimace or raised eyebrows
detectives use this technique during
long interrogations and they're correct
80% of the time number three the logical
propaganda Carl Jung said people don't
have ideas ideas have people and this
pretty much explains propaganda and why
we believe it propaganda is a sort of
biased form of communication with the
goal to influence people and make them
support a belief and when it comes to
propaganda it's almost always driven by
overly passionate people who fail to see
things objectively there are countless
examples of propaganda out in the world
and the one you might not know about is
how eggs and bacon became the American
breakfast back in the 1920s Edward
Bernays who coincidentally was Freud's
nephew was a marketing genius he was
able to use psychology to convince
people to buy a certain product or idea
his marketing strategies attracted the
Beechnut packing company who wanted to
increase their low bacon sales at the
time Edward Bernays had the idea to ask
doctors if a breakfast heavier than
butter on toast would be more beneficial
to the American public see what he did
there
he asked the question manipulate to get
the desired answer after he got his
first yeses he posed the same question
to 5,000 doctors and then presented his
results to a newspaper with the study
that bacon and eggs would be an ideal
heavy breakfast for Americans thus
increasing bacon sales so what's for
breakfast tomorrow you see when someone
tells you according to a study you're
more likely to believe them because it
seems like it was truly researched but
sometimes even studies can be
misinterpreted so if you're unsure about
what you read find the study and come up
with your own conclusions number 4 it's
all about the sources Donny Miller said
in the age of information
ignorance is a choice and that's true
when you want to know where to look for
accurate information let's say you're
doing some math on your calculator when
you enter the wrong numbers in the
equations it'll give the correct result
but it'll still be wrong the same
principle applies to our brain when
someone hypothetically speaking gets all
their information from tabloid magazines
then that person's perception of reality
will be filled with misconceptions it's
no secret that the Internet is filled
with misinformation and passive reading
or listening is
enough these days when it comes to
accurate information you need to dig
deep and cross-reference so when it
comes to finding facts use multiple
sources for any piece of information
that might seem dodging now I know I
said that our Internet is filled with
misinformation but don't go digging out
your dusty encyclopedias because those
are also available in online databases
as well as newspapers all with just a
click of a button number five don't give
in to the Pierre Salinger syndrome
accessing all sorts of information is as
eye opening as it can get but let's not
forget about those convincing hoaxes you
can stumble upon online we've seen
thousands of posts and news articles
putting out false information there was
one recently which stated that a
celebrity couple had broken up and was
written down to detail since the news
was going viral more news pages started
spreading the rumor as well and it
wasn't stopped until the said couple
went online to disprove them until then
almost everyone believed it that's why
the couple had to come out to say
otherwise this is just a mild example of
an Internet hoax and it's called the
Pierre Salinger syndrome this started
with journalist Pierre Salinger who
claimed that he had obtained important
information about the US government
doing some questionable things with
missiles
of course the rumor was disproven but
all the hoaxes still remain online
[Music]
number six the captivating conspiracy
theories whether we're talking about
Shakespeare's works written by Sir
Francis Bacon the aliens in area 51 or
secret societies conspiracy theories are
almost too addictive and interesting to
pass by but why are they so openly
believed well according to psychologist
Michael Shermer there's a simple
explanation for that it's a perfect
example of people creating their own
patterns to give them a clearer
understanding of the world if an event
is big enough then it should match up
with the cause it's more interesting to
believe
why especially when it's imprinted on
your mind than it is to believe the
truth the truth is sometimes boring but
a more interesting story behind an event
with a logical explanation is something
that will grasp our attention for sure
[Music]
number seven the illusory truth effect
when Hannibal Lecter said I'm having Bob
over for dinner nope that's not right
he actually said we covet what we see
every day that translates to the
internet world as we believe what we see
every day and this is called the
illusory truth effect this term was
coined back in 1977 and describes the
tendency to believe information to be
correct when we are repeatedly exposed
to it in other words repeat a lie enough
times and people begin to accept it as
truth let's say I show you a red circle
and I tell you that the circle is white
you roll your eyes tell me it's not and
move on the next day someone else tells
you the same thing and it keeps
happening every day whether you notice
it or not you come across it every
single time you go online or when
someone points it out at the end of the
month you'll really start to believe
that the circle is white because you
were told that more times than you were
told the truth and that's another way we
get brainwashed the best way to avoid
this kind of confusion is to adopt an
attitude of skepticism always fact check
and remember that when we're presented
with facts that don't really add up
they're probably not true all right so
what about you do you get influenced
with what you come across online let me
know down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend but
hey don't go away to fact-check just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life